[Music]
Okay. Good afternoon. My name is Brian
Hagerty. I'm the chair of the El Paso
Community College Board of Trustees. I
want I want to welcome everybody to our
special meeting uh today.
uh the board board of trustees of the
community college will uh meet and you
can follow along on YouTube at https
wwwyoutube.com/user/goepcc
want to welcome everyone here uh Belle
can you take the role please
yes sir Mrs. Robless
here
Mr. Uxer
here.
Miss Nah is running a little late. Mrs.
Moy
here.
Mr. Mendes
Mr. Higerty
here.
Dr. Graham will not be in attendance.
We have anything for open forum?
We do not. Judge.
Okay. Can you read uh we're going to
jump down to 5.4.
Read that please. Bill.
Item 5.4. discussion and take possible
action on proposed policy for adoption
on first reading to recognize the EPCC
faculty senate and ensure compliance
with the requirements of Texas Senate
Bill 37. It should read 89th legislative
regular session including statutory
sections governing the establishment and
function of faculty councils or senates.
Texas Education Code 51.3522,
51.3523,
51.3541,
51.913,
and 51.9431
pursuant to section 554.071
of the Texas Government Code.
Have a motion.
Move to approve.
Second.
I have a question.
Okay, that's after I say discussion.
Okay. ask
discussion.
Well, I want to ask the attorney first.
Do we need to go to an executive
session?
We do not, judge, unless somebody has a
legal question about this.
Okay. Well, this is Mr. Oxer. You may
have a legal question, but is it not a
legal question, John?
I don't hope not.
Okay. Me, too.
One more time. Can we go through and
have you read these things items as
printed A, B, C or numbers, but the list
of proposals as printed in the agenda
and not read every one of the letters
and numbers, please.
Legal council will provide us guidance
on that. I I don't have an issue.
I hope so because the legal counsel told
me in the board meeting last time when I
asked to do that,
it said no problem. Yeah, there there's
no issue with doing that.
We'll do that.
Okay.
Go ahead, doc.
On 37. So, um obviously the um Senate
passed Senate Bill 37 um which
essentially
abolishes the faculty senate as it is
known um today as of September 1st. Um
we have been working closely with our
faculty senate uh Dr. Smith and I, Dr.
Penley has has been instrumental in
helping us with this as well as well as
legal counsel. Um this institution has
long recognized shared governance. We
believe in shared governance. Um so we
have to move forward with the resolution
in order to be in compliance with the
state. Um and we are also moving forward
with all of the areas that we have to uh
implement by the 1st of September. Um
this includes uh the board. Um I will
have to appoint members of faculty
senate including all the officers. Um
not something that I was eager to do,
but it's what the law is and so I will
comply with the law and we will ensure
that we're in full compliance. Again,
legal counsel has provided excellence
guidance for us as we continue to move
forward. And I ask Miss Min as well as
uh as well as her colleague to provide
any insight that they have with regards
to the resolution. I have a question out
of this in the re the reappoint is the
structure the organizational structure
the line the chart organizational chart
for the Senate will it remain the same?
Are you designating new physicians,
realigning responsibilities, whatever
your responsibility with this? Are you
going to say the send is now organized
and composed as previously? We would
have loved to have done it that way.
We're not allowed to do it that way. So,
um, Miss Maren, myself, other members of
the institution,
um, went to, uh, Austin this past
Friday, um, to hear from TASBY, um,
Association of School Boards who
provides, um, our legal policies, um,
and get insight from them. They made it
very clear, um, that the reading is that
I am responsible of appointing
approximately a third of the faculty
senate. It can be comprised of up to 60
members of which um each of the
respective um divisions will appoint a
member or elect a member rather and then
I appoint um so the constitution of the
uh composition of faculty senate will
will change the officers um I am
responsible for appointing they can
serve up to six one-year terms and then
they have to sit out for a two-year
period. those senators that are elected
can be elected for one two-year term and
then they have to sit out for two years
after that term. Um, and we obviously
are working with faculty senate so that
they can have their elections and have
one they're looking at one-year terms
and two-year terms so they're not all
rolling over at the same time. Um, as
far as the organization of the faculty
senate that will it can be no more than
60 members. We anticipate that ours will
be approximately 42 members if I'm not
mistaken, Dr. Smith. Um, and again,
we're moving forward in that direction.
Is that a significant change from what
we had?
I mean, what what exists today is the
old
um what exists today is the faculty
center as it was elected.
September one.
Yeah. As September 2nd, is there a
significant change in the organization
the the the leadership of the Senate?
No. Okay, that's all currently there is
none.
Okay,
any other questions?
Mine, do you have any anything to add,
please?
Um, just that we we need to adopt this.
The the law requires that the college if
it's going to recognize a faculty senate
that it be done by September 1st.
There is uh TASBY is working on a a
permanent policy with regard to that
that you'll have and receive at some
point in the probably late fall, early
winter. The policy that we've attached
is an interim policy. It follows this
the very closely the language of the
statute and the requirements of what the
college has to do with regard to the
faculty senate. Uh but it is a temporary
policy for all intents and purposes
because the pol the college uses TASBY
for all of its policies. It's just not
ready. So we've drafted together with
administration the board policy 2.01.02.
Actually administration drafted it and
we reviewed this policy and and that's
what we're proposing. It's important
that you have also a resolution that
I've given you today. Uh then that that
become part of the board's record along
with the policy so that it's clear in
the pol in the minutes of the board that
this resolution has been adopted and
that the board has recognized the
continuation of the faculty senate.
Do we need to read the resolution?
I think it's best, judge, to have a
clear record in the minutes.
Okay. Got it, Bill.
Do we need to vote or you have a first
and a second?
You'll read it first and then and then
the board will vote to adopt or not
adopt.
Resolution authorizing the continuation
and ratification of the faculty senate.
Whereas during the 89th Texas
legislative session in 2025, the Texas
legislature passed Senate Bill 37, which
was subsequently signed into law by
Governor Greg Abbott on June 20, 2025.
Whereas Senate Bill 37 relates to the
governance of public institutions of
higher education, including review of
curriculum and certain degree and certif
certificate programs, a faculty council
or senate training for members of the
governing board and the establishment
powers and duties of the Texas Higher
Education Coordinating Board Office of
the Budsman. Whereas Senate Bill 37 in
section 51.3522
of the Texas Education Code authorizes
the governing board of an institution of
higher education to establish a faculty
senate and sets forth the policy by
which the governing board shall exist
and select its members. Whereas the
board of trustees of El Paso County
Community College District, EPCC, hereby
recognizes the importance of the role of
its faculty senate and declares that it
shall continue to operate at EPCC in
accordance with section 51.3522
of the Texas government code. Whereas
the board of education,
I'm sorry, Texas Education Code. Sorry.
Whereas the board of trustees of El Paso
County Community College District
determines that interim board policy
2.01 01.02 is in accordance with section
51.3522
of the Texas Education Code. Therefore,
be it resolved, the board of trustees of
El Paso County Community College
District officially ratifies the
continuation of its faculty senate
adopts interim policy 2.01.02
02 governing the existence and
membership of its faculty senate to be
in effect until such time as the board
of trustees subsequently adopts a policy
to be prepare to be prepared by the
Texas Association of School Boards in
accordance with section 51.3522
of the Texas Education Code and declares
that its faculty senate as designated in
intram policy 2.01.02 02 meets the
policies adopted by the board and the
requirements of section 51.3522
of the Texas Education Code. Be it
further resolved that this resolution
along with intram policy 2.01.02
be included included in the permanent
minutes of this board adopted this 6th
day of August 2025 by the board of
trustees of El Paso County Community
College District.
Anybody have any other questions?
If I understand this three three
acknowledges that that it's
discretionary at each institution
whether don't have it back or send a
senate or not but if they do they they
set out the organ organizational
structure which you you identify is that
correct because there's some I guess you
there's some institutions some colleges
or that don't have as correct
that's correct um it it spells out very
clearly that the faculty senate is
purely an advisory board. Um that they
have no authority in any of the actions
of the institution. It's very specific.
Um but again uh from my perspective and
from the administration's perspective,
we believe in shared governance and we
believe that it's important for the
institution to continue but it's
discretionary as whether we have one or
not. That's correct.
Okay.
But by by voting on this 5.4 before this
includes is already in the record so
that we can take a vote.
Any other questions?
Call call a question though.
Mr.
Hi.
Mrs. Robless.
Mrs. Moy.
Hi.
Mr. Mendes.
Mr. Hagerty.
Hi.
Okay.
We'll need a signature by you and Dr.
Graham so that and so that that is
included with the signatures in the
minutes. I know Dr. not here, but I
advised um that we we can get her
permission and then insert her
signature.
Sorry.
Auto.
Well, we're going back to item 5.1.
Yes, ma'am.
Item 5.1, Dr. Julie Penley, vice
president of research, accreditation,
and planning, will make a presentation
on the update of the college district's
strategic plan.
Hello Moto.
Good afternoon. Um this presentation is
a quick overview of where uh we have
been and and where you have been as a
board. Uh where we are as of today and
where we are moving forward with our
next strategic plan. Uh before I get
started, a huge shout out to Rachel
Vontes in Dr. Smith's office for
drafting the visuals. There is no way I
could have done this myself.
Um, so this is the crux of the
presentation. Um, and and if you're
crunched for time, we can stop here and
and you can move on. But, uh, you might
remember last summer, um, I came to you
during your, uh, summer retreat and I
presented at that time the current
mission and vision statement. And uh I
asked you to put your thinking caps on
and make some decisions whether those
statements were still uh accurate in in
the next five years or whether you might
want to revise them. Um after that
cabinet uh began talking about um the
the structure of our work in the near
future. Uh taking a page out of Dr.
Saja's book uh with the four pillars of
student success that that we talked
about at the retreat uh with entry,
progress, completion, and career. So,
while you were doing your homework with
the mission and vision, we were doing
our homework uh beginning to craft some
general statements um and general goals
and outcomes that hopefully would align
with that mission and vision. So, we
were we were working together during uh
during that part of 2024. Um earlier
this year, uh the board came together
and uh finalized and ultimately approved
the new mission and mission statement.
And uh at that time, cabinet um once we
had the green light,
sorry,
I didn't know if I needed to use my
teacher voice. Um once we had the green
light in terms of mission and vision,
then we were able to begin finalizing uh
the goals and outcomes that together
with your statements created the
skeleton of our strategic plan.
That plan is uh in its very final stages
uh with Dr. Mo and uh director Christy
Frescus on the uh visuals that will be
presented and provided to the college
employees and and to you as well as to
our external stakeholders. Uh the plan
itself goes into effect and is
officially launched on September 1st.
At that time, uh, budget heads at the
college will be creating their new, uh,
annual area plan for 2526
in alignment and in support of the
strategic plan. We we talked about that
at our uh, cabinet retreat earlier last
month.
And then we repeat the process in a few
years. So, you will hopefully not have
to hear from me about strategic plan
until uh, summer of 2029.
So, uh, Mr. Xer,
will there be annual updates? I mean, I
don't see put plan out in 25 and then
nobody's going to talk about it in 26,
27, 28. We'll wait till 29 and do it all
over again.
No, we'll absolutely uh be providing
updates in cabinet. It'll be an ongoing
discussion. Uh, and you say the word and
uh myself or someone from my division
will be happy to provide updates.
think just annually somewhere.
No, absolutely, Mr. Plus. Many of the
data presentations that we bring to the
board are part of the strategic plan.
We'll just make sure to reference that
as per our strategic plan so that each
of the respective board members is up to
speed on where we are and then we'll
have Dr. Penney provide an update
annually.
So uh going back to brass tax uh the
vision statement that you all uh
approved in February of this year is on
the screen. Again this is the uh
aspirational
um what you are directing the college to
to achieve. Um not not that different uh
in spirit from the previous vision
statement. We continue to focus on on a
student success um and our role as an
educational institution um towards that
success through our learning
opportunities whether they're uh
structured um academic programs, whether
they are uh out of the classroom
learning uh to to help students achieve
their personal goals.
With the general um what comes the
general how how you all will be
achieving that aspirational statement.
Um it's a lot of words. Uh it it will
fit nicely in a booklet and on a poster.
I promise. Uh Dr. Mo is
been doing uh some terrific work uh with
the visuals uh with with her marketing
team. Um but the crux of this statement
is um again providing not only the
educational opportunities but the
supports, the experiences that holistic
college experience
um to help not only the individual
student but their families, the
community uh and the the region that we
are so proud to serve.
And this uh is not a statement that you
all um have approved. your your uh focus
is on the mission and vision as it
should be. Uh but we took that um vision
if you will that that philosophy of EPCC
a step further by generating a student
success statement. Uh we used to have an
equity statement for reasons that we
will not discuss. We are not uh touting
it as an equity statement. The spirit of
this is is very similar though. We we
see students as individuals uh and and
the heart of this statement is in the
last sentence. Uh we are committed to
success for every student and um for
creating opportunities for that student
and providing resources and support for
that student. Um so again your role as a
board is to uh give us direction through
the mission and vision. You did that
beautifully. We uh added the student
success statement to double down on our
commitment to um supporting every
student, meeting them where they are.
And now we're ready to go back to the
goals and outcomes. Again, this is
something that cabinet worked on. There
was a lot of back and forth, a lot of
intentional conversations
um how we would support those four
pillars that Dr. Sarata has mentioned um
in multiple presentations and how we can
get a little bit more specific in what
it means to meet a goal of progress or a
goal of completion. So this is what we
will be rolling out with our strategic
plan. Um what you may notice um
particularly for returning trustees is
we now have some quantifiable metrics
associated with these outcomes uh to
better provide budget heads uh and
everyone at the college with some um
clear tracking if you will uh of of how
we are doing towards achieving these
goals. Many of these goals uh align with
what the support uh what the state has
identified as valuable in terms of
funding formulas. Um it also aligns with
some of our existing work with our
quality enhancement plan. So although
the words maybe some of the metrics may
appear new to employees or or perhaps to
you, they're really a continuation and
an explication of the work we've been
doing for for years.
Um, some of you have probably noticed
there's an asterisk at the very bottom.
Uh, that one does not have a metric
associated with it. I will come back to
that because you'll see that um outcome
on each of our goals. So, um, any
questions
uh or comments about the outcomes
specific to entry?
Okay. Uh, moving on to progress. uh as
students not only have come to the
college and and identified their area of
concentration, how we can get them to
successfully complete that first half of
their program. Uh so we identified some
some key metrics that we have found to
be important in that student success
during those critical uh first
semesters. A lot of this is supported by
national research. Um uh you may have
heard Dr. set out to talk about uh
gateway courses in English and math tend
to be bottlenecks for students. So we we
brought that to the forefront of some of
our focus.
Um dual credit is also a growing uh
population and is something that is uh
uh you heard from Dean Bedo uh last week
about the growth in dual credit. So we
we want to uh bring that to the
forefront as well. And again you'll see
that uh catchall final outcome of
supporting other departments.
So once we uh have students and
supported students successfully through
their first half of the program, our
work is obviously not done. And so our
completion goal focuses on getting
students to complete their award. Um and
so these types of outcomes focus on that
second half of a student's program. Uh
obviously the total awards
um not just an award for an award's
sake, but an award in a meaningful high
demand uh high wage program in our area.
Uh we we obviously don't want students
to um rack up a lot of of credits or a
lot of hours that are not going to meet
their needs. And so we we brought that
in as a fourth outcome.
And then that last outcome uh which is
beginning to look familiar to you I'm
sure supporting other departments in
their goal efforts.
And then our last goal um is um that
continuation in their educational
journey or for students that are focused
more on direct work uh credentials
supporting them in that arena as well.
So this is sort of a split goal for us.
Um continuing to work with our regional
uh partners through our advisory
committees and other outlets to make
sure that we are meeting the community's
demand for highquality program uh
training. Um lensure rates for many of
our programs is an important part of
getting students into the workforce. Um
transfer
um and again dual credit hours
So far so good.
All right. So that fifth goal um it is
uh designed to help um divisions such as
mine um perhaps uh such as uh
information technology, finance and
administrative operations. We don't have
many opportunities to directly interact
interact with students. um our role is
more of a support um function. And so in
order for us to see ourselves in our
strategic plan and to make um important
and meaningful area plans, we added this
uh this outcome as a way to provide that
support whether it's uh by partnering
with the education workforce division or
partnering with student enrollment
services or partnering with one another.
um to create ways to fulfill the
strategic plan goals and outcomes. Um
for example um my uh the institutional
research department which is in my
division the director uh came to me
yesterday and said what do you think
about creating some better dashboards to
track each one of these outcomes and I
said that would be terrific and maybe
you could work with it to help um that
department we can come together and
create a really powerful um dashboard uh
whether it's enhancing ing our current
structure or creating something new so
that everybody can easily track this
work and not get um lost in the
wilderness if you will.
So that's why that's why that outcome is
there and that is all I had. I am happy
to answer any questions. We we are so
excited about the strategic plan or or I
am so excited about the strategic plan.
Um and I hope that that comes through.
I I have a question. Yes sir.
How did we do uh up to 2024 on our past
strategic plan?
Did we meet every goal 100%.
Um
I do not have that number with me. I
would say um likely not because we did
not have specific numbers for the for
the current strategic plan that still is
in place until August 31st. We are
gathering some baseline data right now
which will serve not only to guide us on
this incoming strategic plan but it will
tell us where we are on the current
plan.
So uh maybe in one of the upcoming board
meetings you can bring us up to date and
let us know how we did on the past.
Sure. Sure. Absolutely. Happy to do that
so that we don't skip something we
missed in our next five years.
Absolutely.
I think that's um a great suggestion,
judge. Um we had some in our strategic
plan which at the time that we um voted
made sense for the institution. It was
prior to certain laws passing. Um and so
some of them it's not in our best
interest to um to report on. I'll give
an example. So our goals and outcomes,
goal two is drive student success. Dr. P
is absolutely correct. doesn't have
specific metrics um but we can provide
data on those but for instance one of
the goals under driving student success
was close equity gaps and student
outcomes uh that in today's uh body
politic is not something that we would
be reporting on which is based on Senate
Bill 17 that passed in 2023.
Um but there's others that we can you
know facilitating college transitions
preparing students with marketable
skills for gainful employment. Um but we
can we can bring um a report to the
board and and show you as as we launch
this one. This one will launch uh the 1
of September and we can bring we can
make sure that we have time um in the
fall to report to the board where we
were on meeting those. Uh at the same
time I reminded the board that that
strategic plan was during the um
pandemic co
I give Dr. Emily a whole lot of credit
for getting that strategic plan up and
running and through during the pandemic.
Um but I'm I'm sure there are goals that
we didn't meet given the moment goals
etc. um that the pandemic impacted
and remind me again how do how do we
monitor the progress we're making?
So the the um excellent question Mrs.
Moy and the the strategic plan is so
exciting because it is going to be how
the budget heads are going to create
their area plan. So uh myself, my
colleagues in the room, any budget head
at the college will be generating a new
area plan for the academic year. They
will pick one of these metrics to focus
on. We will have the baselines um for uh
at the aggregate level. they can uh try
to
say for example uh number one on the
screen I'm going to focus on a an area
plan targeting career exploration in and
out of the classroom by 5%. So we'll
have that baseline number. They may uh
they're going to outline how they're
going to do it. They have quarterly
updates that they provide. And so by the
end of the year, by um next September,
October of 26, they'll have their
baseline data. They'll have where they
ended up. They'll have the interim steps
along the way. They can say, you know, I
I did it. Yay me. Or they can say, I
didn't quite hit that mark. I want to
extend the plan and double up my effort.
So it's more at the individual level but
it is uh accountability through our um
actually through the software that you
all were were so kind to approve uh at
last week's board meeting that that uh
software was to document the planning
efforts at the college
at any point they can re-trigger
evaluation.
Absolutely. Absolutely. They don't have
to generate a new plan every year. They
are welcome to or they can extend the
plan. Sometimes work takes a little bit
more than a year to to achieve. So,
and when we're doing any type of
expenses, do we point back to how is
this expense going to tie to this
specific action?
Well, we we tie um the planning into the
budget development process. So uh our
director of institutional planning uh
comes to the budget workshop
presentations in February to to align
that because it it is resource
allocation and it it um justifies to our
stakeholders not only how we're using
those resources but if we might need
additional resources
for a specific purpose not just I I need
more money for XYZ but you know tying
everything we do back to that strategic
plan in support of the mission and
vision.
Thank you.
Mhm.
Good work.
Okay. Thank you so much.
All right.
Item 5.2. Mr. Fernando Flores, vice
president of finance and administration,
CFO will provide an update on the
development of the 2025 2026 fiscal year
budget.
No.
[Music]
[Applause]
Let the record show that Miss Nara has
joined the meeting.
Wait.
Thank you, Chair Hagerty.
Good afternoon, Chair Hagerty. Um,
members of the board, Dr. Sata, thank
you for the opportunity to present the
second budget development workshop of
the year. The first being on June the
25th was the initial board budget
workshop. And so my name is Fernando
Flores. I'm the vice president of
finance and administration. I'm
supported by Miss Anna Zuniga, associate
vice president, budget and finance, as
well as Miss Laura Deis, the budget
director.
At the June 25th budget workshop, I had
said that the main goal is developing a
sustainable budget. Well, that has not
changed. It is still the main goal to
produce a sustainable budget. The other
thing that we talked about uh were that
on June 25th, many of the numbers that
were presented were preliminary.
So, we're a little bit of over a month
later and the numbers have firmed up
quite a bit. We have better numbers,
better estimates for expenditures.
And so today we're going to look at the
numbers of these as as they've rolled
forward and uh go over that in a little
bit more detail.
So our agenda today is is um just to say
that one budget workshop is under our
belt. It's provided on June the 25th and
so now we have updated the baseline
budget as of June 30th. At the June 25th
presentation, it was updated through May
the 31st. It is advanced by one month
and we've updated the revenues for
fiscal year 2425
which become the basis for the 2526
budget. So it's very important to update
the current revenues to predict what the
revenues might be for next year. In
addition, uh Dr. Sarat has vetted the
additional request with the vice
presidents that are uh in attendance
today
and so you're going to see revised
funding strategies based upon updated
revenue projections and this will help
in your decision- making later as you
consider a salary increase.
So then we will at the end of the
presentation talk about next steps
towards developing a fiscal year 2526
operating budget.
So how does the current year budget
revenues
how do the current budget year revenues
look?
So for state appropriations we see we
have a positive variance of $4.9
million.
That is about 175
that that is about close to the number
we predicted at the June 25th budget
workshop up 11.11%.
Uh overhead recovery is slightly down uh
84,000 a minimal amount. And so when we
look at local funds, tuition and fees
are up by $951,000.
At the June 25th presentation, they were
up about $3.5 million. They were
predicted much higher. We have since
looked at our revenue projections and
gotten a better view of what the summer
exemptions are, which exemptions are a
contra revenue account. So we adjusted
the tuition and fees we expect for this
year down. Uh so that is a significant
difference from what we reported June
the 25th. This is a more accurate
prediction of where the revenues will
be. And so uh property taxes are coming
in at 75 million756,733.
That's a positive variance of $2.7
million approximately.
uh 3.65%
higher.
Other other income is still trending
higher that the large component of that
is interest income. So uh that is $4.8
million higher. It there's such a large
variance because interest income is uh
something that is hard to predict and uh
very variable. So we budget
conservatively for interest income. But
interest rates have remained fairly
high. The Fed has not changed rates yet.
But the world is very dynamic and that
can happen very quickly. So we do not
rely on interest income as a stable
revenue source. But at the moment it's
yielding a nice variance 4.8 million uh
dollars positive. So we come down to the
self-supporting line item. It shows
self-supporting shows a budget of $3
million and we have revenues predicted
of 1.6 million. That shows a decrease on
here but really because we're showing
actual revenues to budget um it shows a
decrease but the self-supporting
accounts we do not spend more than the
revenue that comes into them. That's a
very important aspect to keep in mind.
We are not going to go into any kind of
deficit when it comes to
self-supporting. We only spend and
monitor those accounts very closely in
uh in that area. So overall the way that
revenues look they we have a uh increase
of 11.9 million almost $12 million over
budgeted revenues. Yes sir.
Just because I'm old and I forget
things. Can you just couple examples of
what self-supporting really is? I mean,
what are those?
Sure. Sure. So, uh many times the
workforce area is very dynamic. It wants
to respond to industry demand.
Okay.
So, they want to pilot a program to see
if it's viable and if it's viable, uh
the rules call for them mainstreaming
that account into the operating budget.
Okay, I understand. I'm just
misconception when you say supporting
program.
Yes sir. Are there any other questions
about this slide?
So the takeaway from here is when we
look at um budgeted revenue is $166.5
million compared to what actually we
predict is going to come in, there's a
positive variance of almost $12 million,
719%
increase.
So looking at the current year as well
how that's going to uh wind up. This is
our prediction for how operations are
going to finish this year. This
particular slide incorporates revenues
and our projected re expenditures.
So we see that we have brought forward
we have brought forward the projected
revenues of $178.5
million which is a positive variance of
almost $12 million. We saw that on the
previous slide.
So now what we do over here we estimate
expenditures and we estimate our
expenditures to come in at $148.6
million
resulting in a positive variance of
$29.8 8 million for the year. That's our
prediction. Uh the surplus that is
resulting from this uh helps to bolster
fund balance which is looked on very
positively by SAC COC rating agencies
and also allows us to continue the
practice of supporting deferred
maintenance projects in the plant funds.
So we have a lot of uh need in the area
of maintaining buildings and grounds so
forth. So the college uh is very
fortunate this year and and last year as
well to contribute to addressing
deferred maintenance needs. Um so this
is a result of what we expect for for
year end this year.
So looking forward towards next year's
budget development. This is a strategic
plan for that. So as a review planning
for revenues, the appropriation that
we're going to talk about is a result of
the 89th legislative session which I
think is been extended Dr.
And so uh a result also of the 88th
legislature where the house bill
historic house bill 8 uh was greatly
impacted and so our revenues for the
appropriation have changed greatly. They
are based upon performance measures and
the payment methods that uh they have
implemented are different from the past.
In the past we'd be funded on a bianium
basis. we get an appropriation, we
usually be good for two years. So now
that static model has changed to a more
dynamic one. It's based upon about 17
different performance measures and so uh
very different and also the payment
system that they've implemented is
different as well.
So that is the model that we're
currently operating under. tuition and
fees.
The tuition and fees um line item here,
we've we've uh reviewed our tuition and
fees estimate and as I mentioned uh the
tuition and fees from the current year
largely go to predict what we're going
to receive next year and we budget that
way. It's a very conservative way of
budgeting what you're receiving now and
then you budget that way expect that in
the future. So that is typically what we
do but um what we also do we keep an eye
on enrollment
and as a result we've been looking
almost every day at our enrollment
numbers for the fall and that is
trending lower. Our fall enrollment is
showing some decreases and so we have to
consider the risk of that into our
budgeting. So, we have lowered our
expectation for tuition and fees by $1.1
million as a result of what we're seeing
for enrollment for this fall.
Now, that does not mean that that's the
ultimate number we're going to use
because, as you know, the budget is
presented on August the 27th
to the board for approval. So between
now and August 27th our enrollment may
get better to the extent where we adjust
our revenue estimates.
What is our past uh information show
that it has increase between those those
weeks? The the past information shows
that we had a slight increase at this
point in time and at this point in time
we have a very small decrease predicted
but at this point in time last year we
we show that we were we had a positive
uh increase in enrollment.
So right now it is not positive. It is
it is showing a negative number. So, we
consider that as we develop our tuition
and fees prediction and we'll continue
to do that all the way up until we
finalize and present a final budget for
you. So, it may go up or if it needs to
go down a little bit, it'll be it'll be
decreased as well. The nice thing about
um what the college has done
historically to budget for this to
mitigate that risk of enrollment
declining the college maintains a
bianium reserve.
That bianium reserve is meant for just
such a situation.
We're currently flat judge. Um we're at
18810 right now. We were at 18857 last
year. Uh we've seen the enrollment
process tighten as we've gotten closer
to the fall semester. Um in um in
contradiction with what we saw in the
spring, we saw a very healthy spring uh
5% increase in the spring. Uh the summer
was very healthy as well. Um significant
increase this summer. Um all of those
are indications that we expect to see a
strong fall. Um but it is um weakening
as we get closer. And so I asked Vice
President Flores to adjust the budget
accordingly. I didn't want there to be
any surprises and so it's we're much
more conservative with the budgeting
process. So I asked that he um adjust
the budget and particularly tuition and
fee revenue accordingly. Um I if anyone
has specific questions I'd ask Dr. Maya
from his thing for Dr. Maya to jump in.
Just real quick you mentioned something
about the the current session. Is there
any realistic or expectation or current
special sessions but does that really
set the special session with other
things? So the special session it's a
great question structure lots of
different items on special session which
essentially we know there are many of
our legislators not in Austin and so
we'll see what ends up happening. I
would imagine the governor will call a
second special session and potentially
more. So um the maps have come to
completion. There is an item on the
special agenda that pertains to us
specifically and it is tax rate. Um now
that won't affect this current year's
budget but that could affect the college
budget going forward.
Um I don't know if you have any judge or
any other member has any other questions
on enrollment. Um again we're continuing
to run enrollment and we will run
enrollment through um the first week of
class. uh we allow some uh schedule
adjustments and then obviously dual
credit early college high school will
continue to work with our district
partners um all the way up until census
date and actually I remind the board
that we have um many throughout so even
on census date when we reported
enrollment that's not the final
enrollment because we have many that go
out throughout the fall term please sure
uh so point time is
So, as I mentioned, we're basically flat
with 47 students down from last semester
at the same date. Uh, classes start
August 25th.
We have several campaigns going on right
now where we are reaching out to
students who have uh enrolled
haven't completed their FA or need to
complete their FA. So, we have internal
campaigns going on.
Trellis is one of our partners as well.
They're assisting us with those students
needing assistance with financial aid.
So, we continue to ask students also as
Dr. Sa mentioned through dual credit
early college high school enrollment
because we still receive those rosters
from our ISD partners. So we are working
to get our enrollment keep our
enrollment up and also uh wherever we
end up today the really important number
is where we end up at census date which
is September 10. So we work really hard
to get our students enrolled
and sorry yeah uh we work hard to get
our students enrolled and paid uh by the
by census date. So, we try to reduce the
number of students that we end up having
to drop for a non-payment. Um, so lots
of campaigns going on and
uh we still have extended hours uh
coming up this Saturday uh August 16th,
10:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. August 23rd,
10:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. as well as
extended hours the week before classes
start and the first two days of
enrollment as Dr. Sata mentioned. This
will allow students to enroll as long as
a class hasn't met or via a petition
through a dean.
Have we done any analysis on um how many
students are not returning or how many
we expected to return but are not?
Um I can look at we do see what our uh
continuing student enrollment looks
like. So we all summer long we're
looking very healthy. It's been the past
couple of weeks that we've seen this
slowdown. And one of the markers that we
do look at is our continuing students.
So that's where we've seen a little bit
of decline. So uh there are there are
captive audience. So we're reaching out
to those students as well. If they
enrolled
haven't graduated, enrolled in spring or
summer and not enrolled in fall, we're
reaching out to those students as well.
Okay, thank you.
So, we're going to continue looking at
tuition and fees and adjust accordingly
up until we present you a final budget
on August the 27th.
The next item are property taxes. This
is a number that has been finalized in
the budget. On July the 25th, we
received the certified valuations
uh from the CAD and our valuations went
up about $4.6 billion
to 73.46
billion.
Uh and also we had new property valued
at $1.5 billion
and resulting in a no new revenue rate
of 10.3563
cents per $100 valuation. That is down
from 10.77 almost half a penny down. So
that is driving our ability uh to raise
tax revenue should the college ever need
that. Uh, as a reminder, we are capped
at 15 cents per $100 valuation. So,
anything driving our rate lower is uh
good for the future should it be needed.
Now, planning for additional funding
request um today. One of the items on
the agenda is consideration of a salary
increase. So the presentation before
that on the budget uh is to inform what
the capacity is for the district to fund
a salary increase
and also additional funding requests
that have been presented by the
executive levels that you're going to
see in just a little bit. At this point
in time, uh what has changed from June
the 25th is that Dr.
has had a chance to vet the additional
request and uh dropped them by close to
half a million dollars. So it is a
significant decrease
and so um there is going to be continued
impact from the gazsby 68 and 75 on
unrestricted net position. That is a
very variable amount. We depend on the
information from the state which we do
not have yet but still it's something
that needs to be considered. It averages
about $4 million impact to our fund
balance every year. And so an additional
Gazsby that um Anna and her team are
working on in accounting is gazby 101
compensated absences. These are things
that we are mandated to follow by the
governmental accounting standards board.
Otherwise we would get an unmodifi we
would not get an unmodified opinion and
the uh financial statements that the
college produces are super important to
receive the appropriation to get pel and
are viewed by many granting agencies. So
a very important document to the
district.
So looking at our uh performance tier
this is our appropriation. This is not
changed from the June 25th presentation.
Um, uh, looking at the terminology near
final. This is a terminology from the
coordinating board. So that implies that
there might be some changes to that. So,
but that's the best number that we have
for appropriation. I will tell you that
that 43.9 million is a projection by the
coordinating board on what we're going
to earn as appropriation. Once we report
our actual enrollment numbers to the
coordinating board, it will be different
from that, but we don't know by how
much.
So, uh that number will change either a
little bit or a lot. We don't know at
this point. It's the best number that we
have so far.
And so that's the CR some of the
criteria that now go into the
appropriation
uh that is very different from the
bienium funding that we used to receive
two years ago.
So House Bill 8 also changed the way we
receive that particular appropriation
and any future appropriations in coming
years. So we just have to um uh be aware
of how the funding for appropriation
comes in. It comes in in three
installments now which is different from
the past. Used to come in in 10
installments. Uh so the the state has
changed not only the performance
measures but how they distribute the
funding to the colleges in Texas.
other state funding. The financial aid
for Swift transfer fast
is budgeted at $5.6 million. So that has
gone up $175,000
from the presentation on June the 25th.
The reason that that has gone up is
because now we have received the uh
allocation for the fall of 2024. We know
what that amount is. And then also we
num we know what the numbers that were
reported for the spring. So since Miss
Zuniga had that information she was up
to able to update her revenue projection
for the FAST. Also um keep in mind that
the state increased the funding from
56.87
cents per per semester credit hour to
58.52
cents per semester credit hour.
As far as benefits are concerned, um for
the first time in several years, the
state has raised uh the premium rates
for health insurance. They raised them
by 8%.
And so um the state currently funds our
health insurance at about close to 50%.
They don't provide us funding for
physical plant personnel, however, we
have to uh budget for that. and the
grants uh pay for their own health
insurance benefits. However, um due to
the 8% increase uh that is going to
result in a must be funded or critical
item that you're going to see on the
additional funding request of $74,000.
You're going to see in a little while.
The reason is the state increased our
rate by 8%. We incur close to $7.7
million of u health insurance costs that
we fund and so uh you can do the
extension on that. Uh there's no change
in the state contribution rate for TRS.
So, just as a reminder, last
presentation we talked about the change
in the purchasing uh mandatory bidding
requirement from $50 to $100,000
and uh the board discussed this
particular item and uh agreed that for
the next coming fiscal year, the board
would also like to see uh competitive
processes that are done for anything
valued at $100,000 or more. the college
is working to update its uh procedures
or purchasing procedures with regard to
this and you'll see that in the August
27th
board meeting.
So now we look at the projection for
revenues for 2526.
So as I mentioned the current year is
the basis for projections going into the
future and largely that's what this
represents.
uh on the state appropriations line we
show an uh increase to
the appropriation compared to the
current year. Um that is a result of the
college performing better on its
performing on its performance measures
that were reported last year. Last year,
uh, the college received a $4.7 million
dynamic adjustment
over what the coordinated board had
predicted for us. That was a very
positive result for the year. This
appropriation increase largely reflects
that and also the increase in the fast
funding rate from 56 to $58 per semester
credit hours.
Um overhead recovery, we predict a small
decrease of $84,000
there. Um on the local funds, tuition
and fees, we have a small decrease
predicted there. We are continuing to
look at this item. This is item we
talked about. We're looking at the fall
enrollment and we will adjust
accordingly leading up to the final
budget presentation. Either up or down,
we're going to adjust it. The idea is to
produce a sustainable budget and that is
our key objective.
Um and so property tax property taxes
now that we have the certified
valuations and the no new revenue rate
we predict that we're going to receive
at least $75.2 million in property tax
revenue. Uh the property tax revenues we
budget very conservative conservatively
for those. Uh the big the big thing on
that is that the certified values that
the CAD provides the taxing entities are
discounted about 2.8%.
So when the college receives those
values, they're lower by 2.8%. Because
they are they are predicting what
refunds and lawsuits may result in. So
the the government agencies like that
because it results in a more
conservative budget just in case you
have a large refund or large lawsuit
that may happen. So our property tax
revenue is based upon a certified rate
2.8% lower. However, when uh property
tax owners are mailed their statements,
those do not contain that discount.
So generally we receive more revenue
than what we budget because the CAD is
very good at resolving those protests.
Um and so the the CAD the the city
collects uh 100% of the valuation that
they mailed out. But we budget
conservatively and in doing so we're
still predicting $2.1 million higher
major increase. Other income we continue
to budget interest income very
conservatively at $5 million. Um as I
said interest income is something that's
unpredictable not something that's
sustainable. So we don't build our
budget on that. We failed $5 million is
very achievable. Even if the Fed cutting
rates uh by more than half, we would
still be able to support our budget and
the future does not predict that kind of
uh decline in rates. So we feel
confident about what we budgeted for.
So we we see um overall the take the
takeaway here is this 173.9 million is
our total projected revenues
uh for next year. We cannot exceed that
as we develop a budget. So that's our uh
line in the sand. Uh it's an increase of
of 7.4 4 million over budgeted revenues
for 2425.
So how do those budgeted revenues what
how do they look like in terms of source
of funding? Property taxes continue to
be the largest revenue source at 43.27%
75.2 2 million followed by
appropriations almost 50 million tuition
and fees. Those are the three uh largest
revenue sources and then we have other
income self-supporting and overhead
recovery. So this is showing the
previous slide uh by percentage of
revenue source.
And so we get to the baseline budget.
This is a result of all the budget
submissions by the executive levels, all
the vice presidents and associate vice
presidents. So the budget office works
to compile all of these budgets, review
them, and so those budget submissions
also uh include additional requests that
we're going to talk about in a little
bit. But this is the baseline budget.
This is nothing above what they had the
year before.
So u the baseline budget shows a
decrease of uh $1 million that reflects
the movement of positions people leaving
the college at a high salary and then
the recruit the people recruited coming
in at the lower salary. So that largely
is the result of that. So you see an
increase in the baseline budget from
2425 2526 which is the middle column
continue
of $1 million9,000.
And so the other section in here is the
self-supporting area and they always
budget at break even. They cannot exceed
what they have budgeted for. So that is
budgeted at break even. No effect on the
baseline budget. So then this baseline
budget
reflected by functional area would be
distributed like this. Uh so Dr. Smith
is still in the range here at 54.7
million. Uh 33.11% of the budget and
then uh followed by support at almost 50
million 30% academic support which also
belongs to Dr.
uh 20.3 million 12.28%
and operations and and maintenance
physical plant 13 million student
services 12.7
transfers 3.5
public service 3.83
and research at 214,000.
So this is the way that the baseline
budget is allocated by functional area.
So you see the same baseline budget
distributed by expense categories. So in
here uh the largest category is uh
faculty salaries of 34.13%.
And then you can see in the block here
how that details out between full-time
and part-time faculty. And then over
here staff salaries close to 50 million.
You see the detail between full-time and
part-time over here and overtime and
then followed by supplies and services
28 million 17% of the budget benefits 14
million transfer 7.5 contingency 6.5
travel 1.3 equipment 1.1
so this is how the expenses break out um
for the baseline budget The interesting
thing here, if you add faculty salaries,
staff salaries, and benefits, you get
close to 73% of the budget.
Real quick, some time ago, there was a
question about having enough parttime
split between part-time and full-time
faculty, I think.
Is there any question about them? Do we
have to look at those kinds of tach
evaluations? Are we still okay there? We
we are to date, Mr. Xer. So, what Mr.
Xer is referencing is um gosh um 12
years ago um we had a Sachs on-site
visit. our accrediting agency, SACL,
um, Southern Association of Colleges and
Schools, Commission on Colleges did a
visit and they broke down our our
faculty ratios in a different manner
than they had ever done before. We're
one accreditation, one college, five
campuses, six sites total. And what they
did, this is more in particular for you,
is they came in and they said they
looked at every single program on every
single campus and deemed that we had to
have full-time faculty at each of those
programs and um and campuses. Um that
caused the institution, we were put on
uh we had to raise taxes and hire 55
additional full-time faculty the course
of the year. Um, prior to that, they
looked at us as a district and we
covered between 47 and 52%
full-time faculty in any one of those
given terms during that the the five
years preceding. When they came, we were
just under 48%.
We turn around, we hired those full-time
faculty. Dr. Smith and his team did a
tremendous job of hiring again 55
additional full-time faculty. Uh, we
were taken off morning the following
summer. uh and at one point I I believe
that we had um 72% of our sections
taught by full-time faculty despite the
ratio. So you see that the full-time
faculty salaries are just over the
part-time faculty but our full-time
faculty teaches the bulk of the courses
at the institution. I don't recall where
the last time I saw was 72%. I'm not
sure where we are now. Yeah, I think
we're down around uh 68%. Uh currently
uh every position that becomes available
or is requested for faculty uh gets
discussed at leadership um for
instructional deans and EDPs uh talk
about every single position. We look at
the ratios that uh are being referred to
across the district before we make a
determination on the point. We don't
have any. We're not concerned about
Great question structure. Bringing me
back to the actual question. We just had
an accrediting site visit. Um we were in
23. Uh this was not anything that came
up with um uh with the site visit or the
off-site visit. We were found in
compliance with the ratio fulltime. So
you don't you don't worry about it. The
next time is in 2020 where it'll come up
and they'll look at that closely. want
to make sure that we're always in a good
position.
So, this is a look at what the
additional funding requests for 2526 are
under the critical needs. Uh, overall,
there's a request for $1.7
million. What changed from the June 25th
presentation is we had initially
submitted a request for 264,000
in increase in insurance premiums. Well,
now the insurance carriers have provided
uh what they're going to what they're
going to ask for for insurance. So, we
lowered that to what the increase is for
insurance rates. So, that has been
lowered. And then, as I mentioned
earlier, the increase of 8% to the
health insurance Uh originally we had
estimated 450,000. We were off on that.
We were too low. Uh we uh updated our
numbers, our projections for health
insurance costs. 8% of that cost has
resulted in $74,000
that we need for health insurance.
The other must be funded items have not
changed from the last presentation.
Under the other funding request from
executive levels, uh that is decreased
from uh $2.4 million
down to 1.956,
a decrease of about 400,000, a little
over 400,000. Uh the main decrease came
in the instruction and workforce
education area. Um so that's the main
decrease there.
So this slide is a compilation of the
big numbers that we saw for
total projected revenues. The first row
shows the number that we covered under
total projected revenues. 173.9
million. So we cannot exceed that.
That's going to be our uh top of the top
of the budget line. And the baseline
preliminary budget is $165.4
million. I'm looking in the no salary
increase column
just to start a review of this
particular slide. Uh it results in a
budget surplus of 8 point around $8.5
million.
So how is that allocated? Well, we have
must be funded the increases that are
mandatory that we have to cover of $1.7
million. And then recall at the June
25th budget presentation workshop, uh we
talked about the 6% adjustment to the
salary tables where anybody making less
than $10 an hour would be brought up to
$10. That was about $200,000 of this
particular line item request. And the
difference was a 6% increase to the
entry levels on the tables which will
allow for recruitment and retaining
staff. So, uh that's what that $672,000
is all about. In the no salary increase
column, it results in a surplus before
additional request of $6.1 million.
And so, uh we looked at the additional
request of 1.9 million. So if there was
no salary increase, there would be a
surplus of $4.1 million.
So the way this slide is laid out, a 1%
salary increase has a value of 1,29,000.
This includes uh for the related
benefits
for a salary increase as well.
So in the 1% call you then see when you
plug that number in it results in a
increase in banium reserve of $3.1
million.
So as you move across the columns here
and look at the 3% column you see that
the value of a 3% salary increase is a
little over $3 million
and results in an increase to the benium
reserve of $1 million.
If you continue across a 5% would result
in a uh need to go into benium reserve a
negative amount of almost a million
dollars.
What does the Fed uh expect inflation to
be this year?
The inflation rate right now is I think
about 2.4 Dr. somewhere.
Yeah, it rose to 2.7. um 2.7 but um I
think the current ratio shows it it
trending down once again. Um
it's a great question, Judge. You and
economists um will continue to try and
figure that out. They do anticipate that
inflation will will start to get closer
to 2% um at the end of this year going
into next year.
Yes sir. Look at this the bottom line
additional requests. Going to the
previous page. It said additional
funding requests for 2025. Ed says
critical needs must be funded 1.7
million. And then he said other funding
requests and I I don't see as must be
requested. But the total of all of that
is uh 44,000 less under 2 million. But
we take all of that. Do I take that to
mean that even though it's not must be
funded, we're going to say we're going
to fund all of those requests at the
requested amount. So, in other words,
that 1.956 million is is is as
accepted. It's my revenue to Yes. Okay.
That's all. That's fine.
Why would it be preliminary? You mean
just because whole budget's preliminary?
Yes. Okay.
So, are there any other questions
relating related to the funding strategy
options?
[Applause]
So, what are the next steps? The next
steps are there's an item today to
approve a salary enhancement by the
board of trustees.
After that, at the August 27th board
meeting, acceptance of the certified
appraisal rule, adoption of the 2526
budget, which will continue to be
evaluated,
adoption of the 2025 tax rate, August
27th as well. And then on September the
2nd, Laura and her team will roll the
budget into Banner
and our fiscal year begins September
1st, 2025.
So this is a large team effort.
Everybody has a piece of the pie here.
Special thanks to Miss Deas in her
office, Livana Venica and uh ABP Zuniga
for her revenue estimates. And in my
office uh shout out to Juanita Martinez
and Lucia and Serio who have worked
tirelessly on this presentation.
uh they have been awesome and uh Miss
Shaughnessy is still a force. She
provides guidance and oversight on
pieces of this um all the way from
France and so Dr. Sarata and his uh
initial meetings in May evaluating
additional requests and guidance on
different aspects of this as well as my
colleagues who have uh are not shy about
voicing their input. Uh thank you to all
of them and so especially to the board
of trustees for receiving this
presentation and any questions you may
have had with that. Thank you. Thank
you. Any questions?
Have any questions?
Okay. Thank you, sir. You're welcome as
always. Great job. Thank you.
5.3
Item 5.3 discussion and action to
approve salary increases for employees
of the El Paso County Community College
District for fiscal year 2025 2026
recommendation judge working with um the
cabinet members as well as Mr. 16 in
budget. My recommendation to the board
uh to entertain um for your
consideration to look at a salary
enhancement of 3%. Um that provides
again um a cost of living adjustment as
well as dealing with inflation and at
the same time not having a budget so
tight that we're only seeing um a
$48,000 Miami reserve. uh this would
allow us to a 3% asset would allow us to
still maintain approximately a million
dollar Miami reserve. I'd remind the
board that uh based on an outcomes um
model the the state appropriations will
change annually and we've been fortunate
based on the good work of um everyone at
the college led by my colleagues on my
left um that we've been able to see
state appropriations go up since we
implemented this new funding model in
2023 and we've gone up annually. There
will come a time where we will see an
adjustment downward based on um things
that the state is putting in place. I
remind the board they're not funding all
associate degrees any longer. It went
from 10 years to 5 years in one bienium.
Uh we we're losing um funding for six
associates degrees. It doesn't mean
we're going to stop providing those to
students. We're going to try to get them
through faster and get them to transfer
as quickly as possible. Uh but it's my
recommendation that the board entertain
a 3% salary enhancement for the
institution.
Okay. I have a motion move to approve
3%.
Second.
Any discussion?
Call a question.
Mr.
Hi.
Miss Nah.
Mrs. Robless.
I.
Mrs. Moy.
Hi.
Mr. Mendes.
Mr. Hagerty.
All right.
Now I have a question. You said we're
not funding six six of the six of our
what are the titles? Biology,
psychology.
Let me thank the board on behalf of all
the faculty and staff both fulltime and
part-time for your generosity with the
team. We certainly appreciate it. Um we
do our best to be good stewards of uh
the budget. Uh very proud of the work
that you've done with the budget and
what we've been able to do at the
institution. Thank you very much for
your uh entertaining and passing of the
3% salary announcement.
Okay.
We don't have to go into executive. So
can we just executive? No.
Yep. All right. So we're journed.
[Music]